>> Speaker 2: Can you reiterate what
the situation in source code would be for
a type or b type to end up being
resolved to null as their types?
>> Richard Feldman: We're
actually gonna see that.
So a really easy example of that, well, I
say easy, but we haven't gotten to it yet.
So a polymorphic function,
so if you have a function,
the identity function where
you have an argument.
And the argument doesn't get used in the
body of the function, the argument ends up
just staying null indefinitely
basically until it gets called.
But it can get called and the calling
can cause it to stop being null
identity function is
the easiest example of that, so
we will see some nulls that
persist in the database table.
[LAUGH] Let me get to that.
Great question,
any other questions on this topic?
Yeah.
>> Speaker 3: I on that question,
so how many nulls you allow in rust
will not allow those states, so
you'll be getting errors
all over the place.
This is more of a design decision for
what you are intent,
what you want out of your language and
compiler like so
you have a bunch of null
variables that you're not using.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 3: Some languages are fine
with that,
some languages flag those as errors,
is this kind of a design
decision point here?
>> Richard Feldman: So these are null in
the sense of like these are null database
entries, which is just like the thing
we're using to say, they could also
be objects where we just write down the,
Instead of having symlink and concrete,
we have simply concrete and unbound, and
then when we go through initialize them,
we can initialize them to
an object that says unbound.
It just seemed like null was kind of
the natural like way to say that in
JavaScript, but yeah,
it could be whatever you want.
>> Speaker 3: Yeah, thank you, that does
actually answer my question, thank you.
>> Richard Feldman: [LAUGH] All right, so
that was the scenario where a is null,
what about if b is null?
So at this point, we know that we are not
in the scenario where a and b were null,
because if a and b were null,
we already would have taken this path, so
now we know that b is null,
but a is not null.
Again, there's a number of
different ways you can handle this.
One of the easiest ways to handle
this is basically just be like, what?
Since the order doesn't
really matter here,
I'm just gonna delegate to myself
just swapping the argument.
So basically just call unify again,
passing B for the first argument, a for
the second argument.
So you're essentially doing the swap,
and now you're just gonna come back and
then just like,
do whatever was was done in here.
The reason you might wanna do
that is that at this point,
this is all we're doing
in terms of unification.
But as your type system gets bigger and
more complicated, you can have more and
more stuff going on in here.
And the advantage of doing something
like this is, you can just write once
don't have to write the symmetrical
version where it's like hang on,
what if b was null?
Then we already know these things about
a because it wasn't in there, but
like these other scenarios
still might be happening.
So it's really just a straightforward
way to say like, yeah,
I'm just going to punt all that and say
like, okay, if a is null, do these things.
If b is null, just pretend b is a and
just go handle it using
the code I already wrote.
So then another scenario that
can come up is we say, okay,
we now know that a is not null and
b is not null, and
we also know from resolving symlinks
that neither of them is a symlink.
So by process of elimination,
we now know that if we make it to here in
UniFi both of them have to be concrete.
So if both of them are concrete, then
the scenario that we really care about is,
are they concrete and different?
So remember remembering a few slides ago,
if we get to this point and we're like,
they're both numbers,
we're like, that's fine.
There's nothing wrong with
them both being numbers,
they can just continue to
both be numbers and be happy.
If one of them is a number,
the other one's a string or vice versa,
that's when we have a problem, that's
where we need to report a type mismatch.
So in the future, we will see that
Unify can get bigger and bigger,
there's more and more of these scenarios.
It turns out that like, concrete and
symlinks and the null are not the only
possible things that this will
end up being, or there can be.
If one is concrete, the other is concrete,
you can get these sort of nested
structures where, like well,
what if they're both functions, but
the functions might have
different argument types?
Well, that still counts as a type
mismatch, and we'd have to, like,
do a little bit more logic in here, or
maybe we start getting into two arrays.
We say, okay, well yeah,
you're the both arrays but
they could have different type
variables for their arrays.
There's a lot more scenarios than this,
but
right now we're just starting with like
a version of unified that fits on a slide,
any questions about this version
that we're talking about so far.
So we're just to reiterate
we result on the symlink so
we don't have to worry
about those in here.
We're only either a concrete type or
a null and then you can still end up
returning a assembly,
like setting something to be assembly.
But basically the only things that
we're either doing are we are either
updating a or
we're doing a swap which might result in
b getting updated by the same exact code.
Or we are reporting a type
mismatch because we were like,
these were both concrete and
they had different concrete types.
Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: In the case where they're
both null, and
we're returning a symlink, the idea
is that would be resolved down the chain,
further down in the type checker.
>> Richard Feldman: Exactly, yeah.
So the reason for this case right
here is where you're like, okay,
both of these, actually this comes up,
we can just go back to it real quick.
Right, yeah, sure, we're right here,
so let's just go and
look where it actually happens.
So this scenario right here, this is
exactly that where we're like, okay,
I know a is 0 and
the string literal high is 1, but
this point, this is a and
this is b, they're both null.
There's just nothing, we have no
information about either of them that we
it's really important
that we write this down.
But because later on, this one's gonna
stop being null, and we will have missed
our opportunity to record that it was
a symlink if we don't do it right now.
Because as previously noted,
we don't symlink them to each other, So
we only want to write down one symlink.
And the reason for doing a now is so
that later on, when we get to high and
it turns into a string, we've already
written these two are related,
and now we've sort of retroactively
captured that, a is a string, or
at least configured out
by traversing the path?
Does that make sense?
>> Speaker 4: Think so.
>> Richard Feldman: We can look at another
way if you want.
[LAUGH] So if you think about
it just in terms of, like,
the arguments we're passing in, so
that unified function was like,
it takes two arguments,
lik Aa type ID and b type ID.
What we're doing when we go
through this process right here,
essentially, is we just go through
every single one of these type IDs and
we just call unify on them
based on their node type.
So when you have an equals like this,
we look at that parse tree node and
we're like, I know that conceptually
the relationship between these two,
is that they should be the same.
When you say a is high, the whole point
of naming the constant is whenever I look
up a, I wanna get the same type as hig,
so unification is our tool for
accomplishing that.
So what we're doing is we're saying
we're calling unify passing zero and
one because we wanna say these two
are linked, they should be identical.
Whenever I ask for one I should get
the same type as the other, anhd yeah,
as we saw, there's a few different
scenarios where that can come up.
But this particular scenario is when
we're at the beginning of our process,
We don't have information
about any of them yet.
And so all we can do really is say,
well, unification means they're linked,
let's just go ahead and link them,
and that's what this is doing.
Yeah?
>> Speaker 5: At which step would we
throw things like warning
variable a isn't used?
>> Richard Feldman: Great question.
Now, which step would we throw things
like warning variable isn't used, so for
that one, it depends on exactly what type
of thing you were trying to say is not.
So for example, if you are talking
about literally, a variable or
an argument is unused, both of those can
be done just using naming information.
Like you don't even need type information
at all the scope that we were
dealing with previously,
that's totally sufficient.
We didn't do an example of this,
but if you as an exercise,
you can imagine,
if you're going through the scope.
One of the things you can write down is
not just is this thing in scope, but also,
has anyone ever actually looked it up?
So in other words, changing our scope from
a map kind of similar to what we did here,
where the map would essentially
record a Boolean of like,
has anyone looked me up or not?
And then at that point, if you get to
the end, right before you pop the.
The scope you can go through and look at
all the things you're about to pop and
say, hang on a sec, are any of these,
they're about to go out of scope?
So this is the last chance for
anyone to look them up, and no,
there were no takers.
If that Boolean is still false,
nobody looked it up,
then right there you can record a warning.
It does get a little bit more complicated,
if you wanna do things like unused like
object fields or unuse like variants,
like an enum, or something like that.
For those, you actually do need type
information, because it's more than just
scope, it's about like, here is this
defined type, I defined it to have.
This record is a thing, but nobody ever
actually used that record that requires
it's a more complicated thing
to give a warning about,
cuz you have to connect it
through the type checker.
I'm happy to spend time in, answering
questions about Unify because it's very
important and we're gonna, the next two
sections are all about unifying things.
So now is a great time to ask any
questions you have about them while we
got the code on the screen, yeah.
>> Speaker 6: Are we gona run our
unification to completion, so
are we going to say you've
got a hundred iterations max?
>> Richard Feldman: Are we
gonna run it to completion or
give you a maximum number of iterations?
I haven't really heard of people
giving a maximum number of iterations,
there is a thing that we're not doing
in this course called an occurs check,
which is designed to
prevent infinite loops.
>> Speaker 6: That's what
I'm asking about, yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, yeah.
So very briefly, the occurs check,
basically, the point of that is like,
let's imagine that, [LAUGH] it would
be bad if somebody did this, but
what if you said, cons to a equals a?
Okay, well, that's not good if
you're trying to infer things,
you need some sort of safety guard that's
gonna prevent that from happening.
Now, if it's literally a equals a, that's
really easy to detect in the naming stage,
because you can be like, well, okay,
we're in the middle of defining what a is.
Over here, and you use a so, no,
unless you're a function, it's recursion,
you can't do that.
Similarly, not they don't
look exactly like that, but
there are scenarios where you can get
unification into an infinite loop.
Where it's just trying to resolve things
that are resolving to each other, and
you end up just getting stuck, and
the way that you prevent that is
with what's called an occurs check.
Which is basically you say, okay, I'm
about to go traverse this whole branch of
something of like complicated types of,
like I said, we don't have those yet.
We haven't gotten to functions and whatnot
yet, but there become types where you can
go so far traversing them in the course of
running Unify that you actually end up.
Looping back on yourself without realizing
it because there's all these intermediate
twists and
turns that you took to get there.
The occurs check basically says,
okay, I'm about to go do some
work on this type variable,
I'm gonna go traverse the entire tree and
I'm not gonna try to do the actual unify.
I'm just gonna try to answer the question,
does this type variable like loop
back on itself anywhere in here?
Because if it does, I need to not run
Unify on this, so I'm gonna get stuck.
So this is also one of those things where
if you're making a production compiler,
you really gotta be careful to
sprinkle your occurs, checks.
Occurs like 0-c-c-u-r,
does this occur in this subtree.
So if you look at rocks compiler, there's
a lot of like, okay, do this thing,
but, wait, do an occur check here to
make sure there's no infinite loop,
it's one of those things you
gotta be really careful about.
And if you forget a curse check,
maybe nobody notices, but
then maybe someone's like
the compiler's hanging, why is that?
And they're like, no, I forgot an curse
check somewhere, and they hit something,
this is gonna be fun
to debug [LAUGH] Yeah.
>> Speaker 7: I Just wanna make sure I
understand this, so the first time Unify
is run in like the unification process,
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 7: That resolve symlinks and
press function will basically
always return, null for the type.
>> Richard Feldman: Yep 100%, yeah
>> Speaker 7: Then, in theory,
the last unify call and
unification step shouldn't.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, unless you're
in the very specific case of like,
a polymer function that we haven't
gotten to yet, but yes, for the for
the purpose of the things we've learned so
far, absolutely 100%.
[LAUGH] Yeah.
>> Speaker 8: You're leaving futures
out of our type inference for now.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
So, right, so
when you're in the initial
state of everything is null,
this function is a hundred percent
always going to return null.
And then once you've completely
populated the table and
there's no more nulls than the table,
this will never return null.
Great questions, yeah.
>> Speaker 9: Yeah, I'm kind of
curious with JavaScript you can,
if you have the addition of a string and
a number, forces the number to a string.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 9: How would the,
I'm assuming we're doing this more like
strong typing if I'm using the term
correctly.
>> Richard Feldman: Yep.
>> Speaker 9: I guess,
how would this kinda change if we
wanted to kind of enforce or allow for
type coercion?
>> Richard Feldman: Strong typing, yeah,
so that's another one that's like,
that one's so
controversial I don't even use it.
[LAUGH] Strong typing, I'm pretty sure
that the most accurate, if aliens land and
you were like, I have to describe
to you what strong typing means.
I'm pretty sure strong typing refers to
a type system that I the person saying
strong typing,
that's just what that term means,
cuz if you listen to people argue about
it, that's like, this is just you like it.
So you're calling it strong definitions
are all over the place on that one anyway.
So yeah, the question was, let's say
that you have the plus operator and
the definition of plus operator is not
that they both have to be numbers, but
rather they could be numbers or strings.
That's a rabbit hole, there's a lot
of different ways you can do that.
There's like super fancy ways that
get into like subtyping territory and
there's also like very restricted
ways where you can sort of
like have a little like secret
type variable behind the scenes.
That makes it look like subtyping if
you are not doing it too carefully, but
then if you use it in certain ways,
that sort of reveals that there's a hidden
type variable, and
then maybe it's kind of confusing.
Point is,
we're definitely not doing it here, and
it certainly can be done
in a variety of ways.
But there's trade offs abound [LAUGH]
when you're doing stuff like that, but
definitely life is easier if you
choose not to do things like that.